README.md, before:

# Force graph using numerical optimization
This repo is a personal project that aims to create a [force graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Force-directed_graph_drawing) using numerical optimization.

The project is entirely created by myself, therefore there are probably better loss to use, in case, open an issue and i'll be glad to discuss about that.



## Introduction
This project aims to create a force graph minimizing a loss function that should describe a configuration.

In order to converge to a more "stable" configuration, numerical optimization is being used. In particular are being implemented 2 different algorithms:

 - Gradient descent
 - Nesterov Accelerated Gradient

## Implementation
There are some script file with different versions:
 
 - `script.js`: a naive implementation using GD, the main feature is that the image is scaled in the display 
 - `script-drag.js`: implementation with GD but you can drag the vertexes around (and has a loss graph)
 - `script-drag.js`: implementation with NAG and as for the previous you can drag the vertexes around (and has a loss graph)
## Loss/objective function
In order to create a force map, a configuration is evaluated on the following loss:
<!-- f(\bar{p}) = \sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|} a_{ij} ||p_{i} - p_j||^2 + \sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|} (1-a_{ij}) e^{-||p_{i} - p_j||^2} -->
![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}min\\;f(\bar{p})&space;=&space;\sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|}&space;a_{ij}&space;||p_{i}&space;-&space;p_j||^2&space;&plus;&space;\sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|}&space;(1-a_{ij})&space;\frac{1}{||p_{i}&space;-&space;p_j||^2})

With the following definitions:
 - ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}\bar{p})  is a vector of 2D points (positions of the vertexes)
  - ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}a)  is a NxN matrix where ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}a_{ij}\in\{0,1\}) that specifies if two points are connected (must be symmetric for obvious reasons)

The first part of the objective aims to drag points that are connected with each other, where the second term aims to move aways points that are not connected

Other losses are being tested, for example having ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}e^{-\text{dist}}) as second term. However, seems that it's necessary to have a function that goes to infinity as the distance gets to zero for not connected points, otherwise the modes will just stretch to infinity some points

In the actual calculated gradient, is also being added a Gaussian prior ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\small&space;\bg{white}\sum&space;||p_i||^2) on the positions, in order to keep the graph near 0

## How to use
If you just want to see how the result, you can visit [this page](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/AlbertoSinigaglia/force-graph/blob/main/force-graph-optimization.html), however you can just clone it, and change the script path on the bottom of the HTML file


## Licence
Do whatever you want

## Others
Pay attention that for some reason that I'm not fully interested, it works fien only if the width of the display is greater than the height (in other words, turn your phone or tablet horizontally)

Commit message:

fix readme, changed loss for complete graphs, changed scale

README.md, after:

# Force graph using numerical optimization
This repo is a personal project that aims to create a [force graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Force-directed_graph_drawing) using numerical optimization.

The project is entirely created by myself, therefore there are probably better loss to use, in case, open an issue and i'll be glad to discuss about that.



## Introduction
This project aims to create a force graph minimizing a loss function that should describe a configuration.

In order to converge to a more "stable" configuration, numerical optimization is being used. In particular are being implemented 2 different algorithms:

 - Gradient descent
 - Nesterov Accelerated Gradient

## Implementation
There are some script file with different versions:
 
 - `script.js`: a naive implementation using GD, the main feature is that the image is scaled in the display 
 - `script-drag.js`: implementation with GD but you can drag the vertexes around (and has a loss graph)
 - `script-drag-momentum.js`: implementation with NAG and as for the previous you can drag the vertexes around (and has a loss graph)
 -`script-drag-momentum-manual.js`: implementation as the previous, but has an array called `pairs` where can be manually specified the connections
## Loss/objective function
In order to create a force map, a configuration is evaluated on the following loss:
<!-- f(\bar{p}) = \sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|} a_{ij} ||p_{i} - p_j||^2 + \sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|} (1-a_{ij}) e^{-||p_{i} - p_j||^2} -->
![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\small&space;\bg{white}min\\;f(\bar{p})&space;=&space;\sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|}&space;a_{ij}&space;||p_{i}&space;-&space;p_j||^2&space;&plus;&space;\sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|}&space;(1-a_{ij})&space;\frac{1}{||p_{i}&space;-&space;p_j||^2}&plus;&space;\sum_{i=0}^{|p|}\sum_{j=0}^{|p|}&space;&space;\frac{1}{||p_{i}&space;-&space;p_j||^2})

With the following definitions:
 - ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}\bar{p})  is a vector of 2D points (positions of the vertexes)
  - ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}a)  is a NxN matrix where ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}a_{ij}\in\{0,1\}) that specifies if two points are connected (must be symmetric for obvious reasons)

The first part of the objective aims to drag points that are connected with each other, the second term aims to move aways points that are not connected, the third part is used to keep every point far from each other, otherwise complete graphs (![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}K_1,K_2,...)) will collapse to a single point, 0.

Other losses are being tested, for example having ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\large&space;\bg{white}e^{-\text{dist}}) as second term. However, seems that it's necessary to have a function that goes to infinity as the distance gets to zero for not connected points, otherwise the modes will just stretch to infinity some points

In the actual calculated gradient, is also being added a Gaussian prior ![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.image?\small&space;\bg{white}\sum&space;||p_i||^2) on the positions, in order to keep the graph near 0

## How to use
If you just want to see how the result, you can visit [this page](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/AlbertoSinigaglia/force-graph/blob/main/force-graph-optimization.html), however you can just clone it, and change the script path on the bottom of the HTML file

## Results:
Follow

## Licence
Do whatever you want

## Others
Pay attention that for some reason that I'm not fully interested, it works fien only if the width of the display is greater than the height (in other words, turn your phone or tablet horizontally)
